Tate Staples
Western Literature – D period
05 November 2019
Mr. Adair
Sentience and Rights
	Ex Machina explores the idea of consciousness and forces me to question my preconceived notions that sentience is a defined concept that an object either has or does not. Instead I have gained a more nuanced view of sentience as a spectrum instead of a binary system. Monkeys have been shown to be able to talk, share, feel empathy. This suggests that monkeys are self aware, even if not as much as humans. The essential questions of the movie is where do AIs falls along the spectrum and what rights they due because of it.
Human well being should be the end goal of all endeavors. But why do we value human well being? We base our moral systems on protecting entities that are self aware and have the ability to think. The ability to think provides an entity with a sense of justice and knowledge of right and wrong. Humans use the empathy their intelligence gives them to understand the repercussions of their actions on theirs. Our morality comes from a sense of kinship with others that can think. This leads use creating rules so that people are generally happy and well treated. I believe that if computers advance to the point of thought that they deserve our kinship and we will be able to empathize with them. This means that they should be treated equally to humans because we will value their well being the same and we do our own.
Where do the AIs of Ex Machina fall onto this spectrum? In this movie, we know that Ava was not the only AI, even if she/it was the most advanced. We see videos of previous AIs, one of which shows a desire for self preservation. Nathan likely has made dozens of robots before Ava. The movie makes it quite clear that Ava is an autonomous thinking entity, but how would we view a slightly less intelligent AI? At what degree of sentience do we accept that an AI deserves rights? Ava has the intelligence of a fully grown adult, so does that mean that an earlier model might have had the intelligence of a child? It is impossible to say, “There, now they can think,” because no such clear distinction exists. Even in humans, as newborns we aren’t fully aware of the world we live in. However over time we grow in our understanding and ability to think. Even as babies, we are granted moral rights given to no other entity. My stance is that as soon as an entity develops the ability to feel emotions and use complex reasoning, it is sentient. Sentience is a mix of understanding the comes with being able to use reason and the empathy that comes with emotions. Empathy allows one to value their experience and reason allows one to understand their existence. The relationship between the sentience of an entity and the rights it is due is a complicated topic that is interesting to ponder but has no clear answers.
What do we have about Ava’s sentience? Ava, as arguably the main character of the movie, gets a lot of screen time to flush out her/it’s character. There are three key pieces of evidence we saw that point to Ava’s level of sentience.
First, as Nathan says in the movie, she/it exhibits many human characteristics as she/it manipulates Caleb into helping her/it. Her/It’s ability to manipulate Caleb shows a fundamental understanding of humanity and how we think. Also she/it exhibits many important characteristics such as creativity, sexuality, a desire for self preservation, empathy, and more that Nathan mentions during the film. These characteristics are currently unique to humans and are key attributes to having a unique identity. Ava’s manipulation shows that she/it is a thinking entity and can at least imitate emotions. But how do we know what Ava really feels?
To answer that question we need to go to the second piece of evidence, how she/it acts after she/it leaves Caleb. I found this to be the most informative part of the movie because we get to see how Ava behaves when she/it is not being monitored. As I have previously written about, people can’t be who they are when they are constantly monitored, instead they are forced to conform to expectations. Ava can show genuine emotions. Up until this point all her/it’s emotions might have been faked, but the scene of her/it smiling and she/it looks around Nathan’s house and went outside for the first time is clear evidence that she/it does feel emotions. The other significant action she/it does after her/it’s escape that was interesting is that she/it actually does go the traffic center she/it talks about earlier in the movie. This indicates that Ava was telling the truth about her fascination with humans. All she wants to do is be a normal person who can live her/its life. Ava shows humanity in both here ability to have emotions and her desires.
The final piece of evidence about Ava’s character comes from the actor who played her/it. While describing Ava, the actor said that Ava was “more than human.” This quotation relates directly back to the spectrum of consciousness I discussed earlier. Ava is something that is new and unknowable. The method of Ava’s creation means she/it an amalgamation of all of humanity. This would put her at a level above that of any single human. The implications of this lead me to many more questions I don’t know how to begin to answer. How could a human comprehend what it means to be more human? Will humanity become obsolete? Should we seek to create entities to replace us? What are the ethical implications of beings that are more than human? 
